Urtext Volume VI: Song of Prayer
PROOF COPY
1789
PROOF COPY
1790
VI-iii
Urtext Volume VI: Song of Prayer
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.
PRAYER .....................................................................................1
A. Introduction: ............................................................................1
B. True Prayer...............................................................................4
C. The Ladder of Prayer ...............................................................6
D. Praying for Others....................................................................9
E. Praying with Others................................................................11
F. The Ladder Ends ....................................................................13
2.
FORGIVENESS..........................................................................14
A. Introduction............................................................................14
B. Forgiveness of Yourself.........................................................14
C. Forgiveness-to-destroy...........................................................18
D. Forgiveness-for-Salvation......................................................20
3.
HEALING..................................................................................23
A. Introduction............................................................................23
B. The Cause of Sickness ...........................................................23
C. False versus True Healing......................................................25
D. Separation versus Union........................................................27
E. The Holiness of Healing ........................................................29
PROOF COPY
1791
VI‐iv
PROOF COPY
1792
VI‐1
Urtext Volume VI: Song of Prayer
PRAYER
A. Introduction:
S 1 A 1 Prayer is the greatest gift with which God blessed His Son
at his creation. It was then what it is to become; the single Voice
Creator and creation share; the song the Son sings to the Father,
Who returns the thanks it offers Him unto the Son. Endless the
harmony, and endless too the joyous concord of the Love They1 give
forever to each other. And in this creation is extended. God gives
thanks to His extension in His Son. His Son gives thanks for his
creation, in the song of his creating in his Fatherʹs Name. The Love
They share is what all prayer will be throughout eternity, when time
is done. For such it was before time seemed to be.
S 1 A 2 To you who are in time a little while, prayer takes the form
that best will suit your need. You have but one. What God created
one must recognize its oneness, and rejoice that what illusions
seemed to separate is one forever in the Mind of God. Prayer now
must be the means by which Godʹs Son leaves separate goals and
separate interests by, and turns in holy gladness to the truth of
union in his Father and himself.
S 1 A 3 Lay down your dreams, you holy Son of God, and rising up
as God created you, dispense with idols and remember Him. Prayer
will sustain you now, and bless you as you lift your hearts2 to Him
in rising song that reaches higher and then higher still until both
high and low have disappeared. Faith in your goal will grow and
hold you up as you ascend the shining stairway to the lawns of
Heaven and the gate of peace. For this is prayer, and here salvation
is. This is the way. It is Godʹs gift to you.3 S(2)
1 Schucman had a policy of capitalizing all pronouns and some attributes of any of the three persons of
the Trinity. In this document the capitalization is very inconsistent. Generally we’ve adjusted it to fit
her policy without footnoting each of the many instances.
2 Lamentations. 3:41 Manuscript has “hearts,” handwritten mark-up crosses out the “s”;
3 FIP omits the next six paragraphs
PROOF COPY
1793
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐2
S 1 A 4 Asking is holy, and it is holy because it is a way of reaching
God. He is the Answerer because you are in need of an Answer.
No‐one can4 ask for another and receive the Answer for him. But
you can, and indeed you must, help him by offering your love and
support that his answer5 be holy and his true need recognized. That
is prayer; it is the same for yourself or for another. There is no
difference. If you received the answers for another, there would be a
difference.
S 1 A 5 This does not mean that you cannot get messages for
another, if it is God Who chooses this way of reaching him. This
will usually happen unexpectedly, generally in the form of a sudden
feeling that you have something to tell him; a message to deliver.
You have not been wrong in the past about how you have asked,
but you are ready for a step ahead now. There are joint decisions in
which unanimity of response is a good indication of authenticity.
This should not be abandoned. But asking is a lesson in trust, and
no‐one can trust for another. He can only strengthen another’s trust
by offering it to him and having faith in his ability to hear for
himself.
S 1 A 6 Asking is the way to God because it offers us6 His Will as
He would have us7 hear it. We will have a series of lessons on
asking because you have not understood it. But do not think
because of that that you have been mistaken in your attempts. You
have done well and will do better. S(3)
S 1 A 7 Any specific question involves a large number of
assumptions which inevitably limit the answer. A specific question
is actually a decision about the kind of answer that is8 acceptable.
4 Handwritten mark-up suggests “You cannot”
5 Handwritten mark-up suggests “asking”
6 Typed in brackets (you)
7 Typed in brackets (you)
8 “G” replaces “the kind of answer that is” with “what kind of answer would be”. In these footnotes for
the Song of Prayer “G” refers to a version of this volume published by Gene Ward Smith which
footnotes variant readings from an undetermined source. Unfortunately I have been unable to identify
precisely what Smith’s source was but I suspect it is another and different typed scribal manuscript,
giving these footnotes some genuine authority. This is a matter which will have to be clarified with
further research.
PROOF COPY
1794
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐3
The purpose of words is to limit, and by limiting to make a vast area
of experience9 more manageable. But that means manageable by
YOU. For many aspects of living in this world that is necessary. But
not for asking. God does not use words and does not answer in
words. He can only “speak”10 to the Christ in you, Who translates
His Answer11 into whatever language you can understand and
accept. Sometimes words will limit fear; sometimes not. That is
why some people hear words, some12 receive feelings of inner
conviction, and some do not become aware of anything. Yet God
has answered, and His Answer will reach you when you are ready.
S 1 A 8 Answers are not up to you. Any limit you place on13 them
interferes with hearing. God’s Voice is silent and speaks in silence.14
That means that you do not phrase the question and you do not
restrict the answer.
S 1 A 9 Asking is15 prayer. It is not a demand. It is not questioning.
It is not limitation. The only real request is for God’s Answer. It16
needs the humility of trust, not the arrogance of false certainty.
Trust cannot lie in idols, for that is merely faith in magic.17 Trust
requires faith that God understands, knows, and will answer. It
means a state of peace. For this you can18 safely ask. In fact, if you
do not feel that you19 have it, asking for it is the only real request20
you can make.
9 “G” omits “of experience”
10 FIP omits quotation marks
11 “G” doesn’t capitalize “His Answer”
12 FIP adds “people”
13 “G” has “upon” instead of “on”
14 1 Kings 19:12, Ps. 46:10
15 Handwritten mark-up suggests “a form of”
16 Handwritten mark-up suggests “Thus it” or perhaps this is suggesting “This” in place of “it” … it is
somewhat ambiguous.
17 Handwritten mark-up suggests paragraph break here.
18 FIP has “may”
19 “G:” omits “feel that you”
20 Handwritten mark-up suggests “that”
PROOF COPY
1795
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐4
B. True Prayer
S 1 B 1 Prayer is a21 way offered by the Holy Spirit to reach God. It
is not merely a question or an entreaty. It cannot succeed until you
realize that it asks for nothing. How else could it serve its purpose?
It is impossible to pray for idols and hope to reach God. True
prayer must avoid the pitfall of asking to entreat. Ask rather to
receive what is already given;22 to accept what is already there.
S 1 B 2 You have been told to ask the Holy Spirit for the answer to
any specific S(4) problem, and that you will receive a specific
answer if such is your need. You have also been told that there is
only one problem and one answer. In prayer this is not
contradictory. There are decisions to make here, and they must be
made whether they be illusions or not. You cannot be asked to
accept answers which are beyond the level of need that23 you24
recognize.25 Therefore it is not the form of the question that matters,
nor how it is asked. The form of the answer, if given by God
through His Voice,26 will suit your need as you see it. This is merely
an echo of the reply of His Voice. The real sound is always a song of
thanksgiving and love.27
S 1 B 3 We28 cannot, then, ask for the echo. It is the song that is the
gift. Along with it come the overtones, the harmonics, the echoes,
but these are secondary. In true prayer you hear only the song. All
the rest is merely added. You have sought first the Kingdom of
Heaven,29 and all else has indeed been given you.30
21 Manuscript does not have the “a” here, it is a handwritten correction
22 Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened
to you.”
23 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “that”
24 FIP inserts “can” here
25 Handwritten mark-up indicates paragraph break at this point.
26Handwritten mark-up crosses out “through His Voice”
27 FIP has “of Love”
28 “We” is crossed out and “You” is penciled in.
29 Handwritten mark-up appears to cross out the comma.
30 Matthew 6:33 “But seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be
added to you.”
PROOF COPY
1796
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐5
S 1 B 4 The secret of true prayer is to forget the things you think
you need. To ask for the specific is much the same as to look on sin
and then forgive it. Also in the same way, in prayer you overlook
your specific needs as you see them, and let them go into His31
hands. There they become your gifts to Him, for they tell Him that
you would have no gods before Him;32 no Love33 but His.34 What
could His Answer be but your remembrance of Him? Can this be
traded for a bit of trifling advice about a problem of an instantʹs
duration? God answers only for eternity. But still all little answers
are contained in this.
S 1 B 5 Prayer is a stepping aside; a letting go; a quiet time of
listening and loving. It should not be confused with supplication of
any kind, because it is a way of remembering your holiness. Why
should holiness entreat, being fully entitled to everything love has
to offer? And it is to Love one goes35 in prayer. Prayer is an
offering; a giving up of oneself36 to be at one with Love. There is
nothing to ask because there is nothing left to want. That
nothingness becomes the altar of God. It disappears in Him. S(5)
S 1 B 6 This is not a level of prayer that everyone can attain as yet.
Those who have not37 need your help in prayer because their asking
is not yet based upon acceptance. Help in prayer does not mean
that another mediates between you and God. But it does mean that
another can stand38 beside you and help39 to raise you up to Him.
One who has realized the goodness of God prays without fear. And
one who prays without fear cannot but reach Him. He can therefore
also reach His Son, wherever he may be and whatever form he may
seem to take.
31 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change this to “God’s”
32 Exodus 20:3 “You shall have no other gods before Me.”
33 Manuscript is in lower case, handwritten mark-up corrects it to upper case.
34 The word (Him) is typed in brackets and crossed out.
35 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “you go”
36 Crossed out with “yourself” penciled in.
37 FIP adds “reached it still”, handwritten mark-up adds “still.” the original typing is crossed out and
reads “Until they (He) do they …”
38 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “can” and pluralizes “stand” to “stands”
39 Handwritten mark-up and FIP have this as “helps” instead of “help”
PROOF COPY
1797
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐6
S 1 B 7 Praying to Christ in anyone is true prayer because it is a gift
of thanks to his Father. To ask that Christ be but Himself is not an
entreaty but it IS40 a song of thanksgiving for what you are. Herein
lies the power of prayer. It asks nothing and receives everything.
This prayer can be shared because it receives for everyone. To pray
with one who knows that this is true is to be answered. Perhaps the
specific form of solution41 for a specific problem will occur to either
of you; it does not matter which. Perhaps it will reach both, if you
are genuinely attuned to one another. It will come because you
have realized that it does not matter. Therein lies its only truth.42
C. The Ladder of Prayer
S 1 C 1 Prayer has no beginning and no end. It is a part of life. But
it does change in form, and grows with learning until it reaches its
formless state, and fuses into total communication with God. In its
asking form it need not, and often does not, make appeal to God, or
even involve belief in Him. At that level43 prayer is merely wanting,
out of a sense of scarcity and lack.
S 1 C 2 The prayer, or asking‐out‐of‐need,44 always involves
feelings of weakness and inadequacy, and could never be made by a
Son of God who knows Who he is. No‐one, then, who is sure of his
Identity could pray in this form.45 Yet it is also true that no‐one who
is uncertain of his Identity could46 avoid praying in this way. And
prayer is as continual as life. Everyone prays without ceasing.47
40 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “but it is” , FIP inserts sentence break after “entreaty” and leaves
out “but” and the handwritten mark-up may do that also, legibility is not good.
41 FIP changes “solution” to “resolution”
42 Handwritten mark-up suggests “Christ is in both of you. That is its only truth.”
43 Handwritten mark-up suggests “these levels”
44 Handwritten mark-up replaces “for” with “or”. FIP rewrites this as “These forms of prayer, or
asking… involve” Some think it was supposed to be “That prayer, or asking out of need, always
involves” as this requires the fewest alterations of the text to achieve grammatical and logical sense.
Manuscript has “The prayer for asking-out-of-need”
45 FIP changes “this form” to “these forms”
46 Handwritten mark-up suggests “can”
47 1 Thessalonians 5:17 “Pray without ceasing,”
PROOF COPY
1798
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐7
Ask and you have received,48 for you have established what it is S(6)
you want.
S 1 C 3 It is also possible to reach a higher form of asking‐out‐of‐
need, for in this world prayer must be used for reparation,49 and so
it must entail levels of learning. Here, the asking may be addressed
to God in honest belief, though not yet with understanding. A
vague and usually unstable sense of identification has generally
been reached, but it50 tends to be blurred by a deep‐rooted sense of
sin. It is possible at this level to continue to ask for things of this
world in various forms, but51 it is also possible to ask for qualities52
such as honesty or goodness, and particularly for forgiveness for the
many sources of guilt that inevitably underlie any prayer of need.
Without guilt there is no scarcity. The sinless have no needs.
S 1 C 4 At this level also comes53 that curious contradiction in terms
known as “praying for oneʹs enemies.” The contradiction lies not in
the actual words, but54 in the way they are usually interpreted.
While you believe you have enemies, you have limited prayer to the
laws of this world, and55 limited your ability to receive and56 accept
to the same narrow margins. And yet, if you have enemies you
have need of prayer, and great need, too. What does the phrase
really mean? Pray for yourself, that you may not seek to imprison
Christ and thereby lose the recognition of your own Identity. Be
traitor to no‐one, or you will be treacherous to yourself. An enemy
is the symbol for57 an imprisoned Christ. And who could He be
except yourself?
48 Matthew. 7:7-8 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be
opened to you. For everyone who asks receives, and he who seeks finds, and to him who knocks it will
be opened.” Also see Luke. 11:19;John 17:7;16:23
49 FIP has “is reparative” instead of “must be used for reparation”
50 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “it”
51 FIP replaces “but” with “and”
52 Handwritten mark-up replaces “qualities” with “gifts”
53 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “comes” and adds “begins” at the end of this sentence. FIP retains
original reading.
54 Handwritten mark-up inserts “rather”
55 Handwritten mark-up inserts “have also”
56 FIP adds “to”
57 FIP changes “for” to “of”
PROOF COPY
1799
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐8
S 1 C 5 The prayer for enemies thus becomes a prayer for your own
freedom. Now it is no longer a contradiction in terms. Rather it is58
a statement of the unity of Christ and a recognition of His
sinlessness. And now it has become holy, for it acknowledges the
Son of God as he was created.
S 1 C 6 Let it never be forgotten that prayer at any level is always
for yourself. If you unite with anyone in prayer, you make him part
of you. The enemy59 is you, as is the Christ. Before it can become
holy, then, prayer becomes a choice. You do not choose for another.
You can but choose for yourself. Pray truly for your enemies, S(7)
then, for herein lies your own salvation. Forgive them for your sins,
and you will be forgiven indeed.
S 1 C 7 Prayer is a ladder reaching up to Heaven.60 At the top there
is a transformation much like your own, for prayer is part of you.
The things of earth are left behind, all unremembered. There is no
asking, for there is no lack. Identity in Christ is fully recognized as
set forever, beyond all change and incorruptible. The light no
longer flickers, and will never go out.
S 1 C 8 Now, without needs of any kind, and clad forever in the
pure sinlessness which61 is the gift of God to you, His Son, prayer
can again become what it was meant to be. For now it rises as a
song of thanks to your Creator, sung without words, or thoughts, or
vain desires, unneedful now of anything at all. So it extends, as it
was meant to do. And for this giving God Himself gives thanks.
S 1 C 9 God is the goal of every prayer, giving it timelessness
instead of end. Nor has it a62 beginning, because the goal has never
changed. Prayer in its earlier forms is an illusion, because there is
no need for a ladder to reach what one has never left. Yet prayer is
part of forgiveness as long as forgiveness, itself an illusion, remains
58 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “Rather” and changes “it is” to “It has become”.
59 Handwritten mark-up suggests quotation marks around “enemy”
60 Genesis 28:12 “And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to
heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it. “
61 FIP replaces “which” with “that”
62 Handwritten mark-up suggests “a beginning”, Manuscript omits “a”
PROOF COPY
1800
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐9
unattained. Prayer is tied up with learning until the goal of learning
has been reached. And then all things will be transformed together,
and returned unblemished into the Mind of God.
S 1 C 10 Being beyond learning, this state cannot be described. The
stages necessary to its attainment, however, need to be understood,
if peace is to be restored to the Son of God,63 who lives now with the
illusion of death and the fear of God.
D. Praying for Others
S 1 D 1 We said that prayer is always for yourself, and this is true.64
Why, then, should you pray for others at all? And if you should,
how should you do it? Praying for others, if rightly understood,
becomes a means for lifting your projections of guilt from your
brother, and enabling you to recognize it is not he who is hurting
you. The poisonous thought that he IS your enemy, your evil
counterpart, your nemesis, must be relinquished before YOU can be
saved from guilt. For this the means is prayer, of rising power and
with ascending S(8) goals, until it reaches even up to God.
S 1 D 2 The earlier forms of prayer, at the bottom of the ladder, will
not be free from envy and even65 malice. They call for vengeance,
not for love. Nor do they come from one who understands that they
are calls for death, made out of fear by those who cherish guilt.
They call upon a vengeful god, and it is he who seems to answer
them. Hell cannot be asked for another, and then escaped by him
who asks for this.66 Only those who are in hell can ask for hell.
Those who have been forgiven, and who have67 accepted their
forgiveness, could never make a prayer like this.68
S 1 D 3 At this level,69 then, the learning goal must be to recognize
that prayer will bring an answer only in the form in which the
63 Handwritten mark-up suggests “God’s Son”
64 FIP replaces “true” with “so”
65 FIP omits “even”
66 Handwritten mark-up, FIP suggests “it”
67 FIP omits “have”
68 FIP replaces “this” with “that”
69 Handwritten mark-up and FIP have “these levels”
PROOF COPY
1801
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐10
prayer was made. This is enough. From here it will be an easy step
to the next level.70 It71 begins with this:
“What I have asked for for my brother is not what I would have. Thus
have I made of him my enemy.”72
S 1 D 4 It is apparent that this step cannot be reached by anyone
who sees no value nor73 advantage to himself in setting others free.
This may be long delayed, because this step74 may seem to be
dangerous instead of merciful. To the guilty there seems indeed to
be a real advantage in having enemies, and this imagined gain75
must go, if enemies are to be set free. Guilt must be given up, and
not concealed. Nor can it be76 without some pain, and a glimpse of
the merciful nature of this step may for some time be followed by a
deep retreat into fear. For fearʹs defenses are fearful in themselves,
and when they are recognized they bring their fear with them.
S 1 D 5 Yet what advantage has an illusion of escape ever brought a
prisoner? His real escape from guilt can lie only in the recognition
that the guilt has gone. And how can this be recognized as long as
he hides it in another, and does not see it as his own? Fear of escape
makes it difficult to welcome freedom, and to make a jailer of an
enemy seems to be safety. How, then, can he be released without an
insane fear for yourself? You have made of him your salvation and
your S(9) escape from guilt. Your investment in this escape is
heavy, and your fear of letting77 go is strong.
S 1 D 6 Stand still an instant, now, and think what you have done.
Do not forget that it is you who did it, and who can therefore let it
go. Hold out your hand; this enemy has come to bless you. Take
his blessing and feel how your heart is lifted and your fear released.
Do not hold on to it, nor onto him. He is a Son of God, along with
70 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “level” to “levels”
71 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “it” with “The next ascent”
72 FIP omits quotes
73 FIP has “or” instead of “nor”
74 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “this step” with “it”
75 Manuscript has “game” corrected by handwritten mark-up and FIP to “gain”
76 FIP and handwritten mark-up suggest “this be done”
77 FIP has “letting it go”
PROOF COPY
1802
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐11
you. He is no jailer, but a messenger of Christ. Be this to him, that
you may see him thus.
S 1 D 7 It is not easy to realize that prayers for things, for status,78
for external ʺgiftsʺ of any kind, are always made to set up jailers79
and to hide from guilt. Yet these things, too,80 are used for goals
that substitute for God, and therefore distort the purpose of prayer.
The desire for them IS the prayer. One need not ask explicitly. The
goal of God is lost in the quest for lesser goals of any kind, and
prayer becomes requests for enemies. The power of prayer can be
quite clearly recognized even in this. No‐one who wants an enemy
will fail to find one. But just as surely will he lose the only true goal
that is given him. Think of the cost, and understand it well. All
other goals are at the cost of God.
E. Praying with Others
S 1 E 1 Until the second step81 at least begins, one cannot share in
prayer,82 for until that point, each one must ask for different things.
But once the need to hold the other as an enemy has been
questioned, and the reason83 has been recognized if only for an
instant, it becomes84 possible to join in prayer. Enemies do not share
a goal, and it is here85 their enmity is kept. Their separate wishes are
their arsenals; their fortresses in hate. The key to rising further still
in prayer lies in this simple thought; this change of mind:
We go together, you and I.
S 1 E 2 Now it is possible to help in prayer, and so reach up
yourself. This step begins the quicker ascent, but there are still
many lessons86 to learn. The way is open, and hope is justified. Yet
78 The word “attributes” is typed and struck out, the word “status” being put in its place. Handwritten
mark-up and FIP suggest adding “for human love,” here.
79 initially typed “a jailer” this is crossed out and “jailers” typed above.
80 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “Yet these things, too, to “These things are”
81 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “step” with “level” and omit “at least”
82 FIP inserts sentence break here.
83 FIP inserts “for doing so”
84 Handwritten mark-up suggests “at least”
85 Handwritten mark-up and FIP remove “and”, beginning a new sentence with “It is in this their
enmity”
86 The word “yet” is overstruck out in the Manuscript here.
PROOF COPY
1803
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐12
it is likely at first that what is asked for even by those who join87 in
prayer is not the goal that prayer S(10) should truly seek. Even
together they88 may ask for things, and thus set up but an illusion of
a goal they89 share. They90 may ask together for specifics, and not
realize that they91 are asking for effects without the cause. And this
they92 cannot have. For no‐one can receive effects alone, and
choose93 a cause from which they do not come to offer them to him.
Even the joining, then, is not enough, if those who pray together do
not ask, before all else, what is the Will of God. From this Cause
only can the Answer94 come in which are all specifics satisfied; all
separate wishes unified in one.
S 1 E 3 Prayers95 for specifics always ask96 to have the past repeated
in some way. What was enjoyed before, or seemed to be, ‐‐ what
was97 anotherʹs and he seemed to like,98 ‐‐ all these are but illusions
from the past. The aim of prayer is to release the present from its
chains of past illusions; to let it be a freely chosen remedy from
every choice that stood for a mistake. What prayer can offer now so
far exceeds all that you asked before that it is pitiful to be content
with less.
S 1 E 4 You have99 a newborn‐chance each time you pray. And
would you stifle and imprison it in ancient prisons, when the chance
has come to free yourself from all of them at once? Do not restrict
your asking. Prayer can bring the peace of God. What time‐bound
thing can give you more than this, in just the little space that lasts
until it crumbles into dust?
87 Handwritten mark-up suggests “sometimes”
88 FIP changes “they” to “you”
89 FIP changes “they” to “you”
90 FIP changes “they” to “you”
91 FIP changes “they” to “you”
92 FIP changes “they” to “you”
93 Handwritten mark-up suggests “ask”, FIP uses “asking”
94 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “Answer” to “answer”
95 FIP has the singular “Prayer”
96 FIP has “asks”
97 Manuscript has “is”, handwritten mark-up and FIP correct this to “was”
98 FIP has “love”
99 FIP inserts “chosen”
PROOF COPY
1804
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐13
F. The Ladder Ends
S 1 F 1 Prayer is a way to true humility. But100 here again it rises101
up, slowly at first,102 and grows in strength and love and holiness.
Let it but leave the ground where it begins to rise to God, and true
humility will come at last to grace the mind that thought it was
alone and stood against the world. Humility brings peace because it
does not claim that you must rule the universe, nor103 judge all
things as you would have them be. All little gods it gladly lays
aside, not in resentment, but in honesty and recognition that they
did104 not serve.
S 1 F 2 Illusions and humility have goals so far apart they cannot
coexist, S(11) nor share a dwelling place.105 Where one has come the
other disappears. The truly humble have no goal but God because
they need no idols, and defense no longer has106 a purpose. Enemies
are useless now, because humility does not oppose. It does not hide
in shame because it is content with what it is, knowing creation is
the Will of God. Its selflessness is Self, and this it sees in every
meeting, where it gladly joins with every Son of God, whose purity
it recognizes that it shares with him. Now prayer is lifted from the
world of things, of bodies, and of gods of every kind, and you can
rest in holiness at last. Humility has taught107 you how to
understand your glory as Godʹs Son, and recognize the arrogance of
sin. A dream has veiled the face of Christ from you. Now can you
look upon His sinlessness.
S 1 F 3 High has the ladder risen. You have come almost to
Heaven. There is little more to learn before the journey is complete.
Now108 you say to everyone who109 joins in prayer with you:
100 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “But” to “And”
101 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “slowly”
102 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete “slowly at first”
103 Manuscript has “or” corrected to “nor” by handwritten mark-up
104 FIP has “do”
105 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “where they can meet” “G” notes that insertion creates IP
106 FIP changes “has” to “serves”
107 Handwritten mark-up, FIP suggest “has come to teach”
108 Handwritten mark-up, FIP suggest “can”
109 Handwritten mark-up, FIP suggest “comes to join”
PROOF COPY
1805
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐14
“I cannot go without you, for you are a part of me.”
And so he is in truth. Now must110 you pray only for what you truly
share with him. For you have understood he never left, and you,
who seemed alone, are one with him.
S 1 F 4 The ladder ends with this, for learning is no longer needed.
Now you stand before the gate of Heaven, and your brother stands
beside you there. The lawns are deep and still, for here the place
appointed for the time when you should come has waited long for
you. Here will time end forever. At this gate eternity itself will join
with you. Prayer has become what it was meant to be, for you have
recognized the Christ in you. S(12)
FORGIVENESS
A. Introduction
S 2 A 1 Forgiveness offers wings to prayer, to make its rising easy
and its progress swift. Without its strong support it would be vain
to try to rise above the111 bottom step, or even to attempt to climb at
all. Forgiveness is prayerʹs ally; sister in the plan for your salvation.
Both must come to hold you up and keep your feet secure; your
purpose steadfast and unchangeable. Behold the greatest help that
God ordained to be with you until you reach to Him. Illusionʹs end
will come with this. Unlike the timeless nature of its sister prayer,
forgiveness has an end, for it becomes unneeded when the rising up
is done. Yet now it has a purpose beyond which you cannot go, nor
have you need to go. Accomplish this and you have been
redeemed. Accomplish this and you have been transformed.
Accomplish this and you will save the world.
B. Forgiveness of Yourself
S 2 B 1 No gift of Heaven has been more misunderstood than has
forgiveness. It has, in fact, become a scourge; a curse where it was
meant to bless, a cruel mockery of grace, a parody upon the holy
110 Handwritten mark-up, FIP suggest “can” instead of “must”
111 FIP replaces “the” with “Prayer’s”
PROOF COPY
1806
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐15
peace of God. Yet those who have not yet elected112 to begin the
steps of prayer cannot but use it thus. Forgivenessʹs113 kindness is
obscure at first, because salvation is not understood, NOR TRULY
SOUGHT FOR. What was meant to heal is used to hurt because
forgiveness is not wanted. Guilt becomes salvation, and the remedy
appears to be a terrible alternative to life.
S 2 B 2 Forgiveness‐to‐destroy will therefore suit the purpose of the
world far better than its true objective, and the honest means by
which this goal is reached. Forgiveness‐to‐destroy will overlook no
sin, no crime, no guilt that it can114 find and “love.” Dear to its heart
is error, and mistakes loom large and grow and swell within its
sight. It carefully picks out all evil things, and overlooks the loving
as a plague; a hateful thing of danger and of death. Forgiveness‐to‐
destroy IS death,115 and this it sees in everything116S(13) it looks
upon and hates. Godʹs mercy has become a twisted knife that
would destroy the holy Son He loves.
S 2 B 3 Would you forgive yourself for doing this? Then learn that
God has given you a117 means by which you can return to Him in
peace. DO NOT SEE ERROR. Do not make it real. Select the loving
and forgive the sin by choosing in its place the face of Christ. How
otherwise can prayer return to God? He loves His Son. Can you
remember Him and hate what He created? You will hate his Father
if you hate the Son He loves. For as you see the Son you see
yourself, and as you see yourself is God to you.118
S 2 B 4 As prayer is always for yourself, so is forgiveness119 given
you. It is impossible to forgive another, for it is only your sins you
112 FIP has “chosen”
113 FIP and the Manuscript both have “Forgiveness’”, or “s apostrophe” which would be correct if
“forgiveness” were a plural possessive case, but it is a singular possessive case, so it should be
“apostrophe s” -- From "A Manual of Style" (12th ed., University of Chicago Press, 1969):
114 Handwritten mark-up, FIP add “seek and”
115 Romans 6:23 “For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our
Lord.”
116 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “everything” to “all”
117 FIP changes “a” to “the”
118 Matthew 25:40 “And the King will answer and say to them, ‘Assuredly, I say to you, inasmuch as
you did it to one of the least of these My brethren, you did it to Me.'”
119 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “always”
PROOF COPY
1807
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐16
see in him. You want to see them there, and not in you. That is why
forgiveness of another is an illusion. Yet it is the only happy dream
in all the world; the only one that does not lead to death. Only in
someone else can you forgive yourself, for you have called him
guilty of your sins, and in him must your innocence120 be found.
Who but the sinful need to be forgiven? And do not ever think you
can see sin in anyone except yourself.
S 2 B 5 This is the great deception of the world, and you the great
deceiver of yourself. It always seems to be another who is evil, and
in his sin you are the injured one. How could freedom be possible if
this were true?121 You would be slave to everyone, for what he does
entails your fate, your feelings, your despair or hope, your misery or
joy. You have no freedom unless he gives it to you. And being evil,
he can only give of what he is. You cannot see his sins and not your
own. But you can free him and yourself as well.
S 2 B 6 Forgiveness, truly given, is the only way in which your122
hope of freedom lies. Others will make mistakes and so will you, as
long as this illusion of a world appears to be your home. God123 has
given all His Sons a remedy for all illusions that they think they see.
Christʹs vision does not use your eyes, but you can look through His
and learn to see like Him. Mistakes are tiny shadows, quickly gone,
which124 for an instant only seem S(14) to hide the face of Christ,
which still remains unchanged behind them all. His constancy
remains in tranquil silence and in perfect peace. He does not know
of shadows. His the eyes that look past error to the Christ in you.
S 2 B 7 Ask then His help, and ask Him how to learn forgiveness as
His vision lets it be. You are in need of what He gives, and your
salvation rests on learning this of Him. Prayer cannot be released to
Heaven while forgiveness‐to‐destroy remains with you. Godʹs
120 FIP suggests “now”
121 FIP suggests “so”
122 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “only” here, removing the immediately previous instance of
“only”
123 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “Yet God Himself”
124 FIP changes “which” to “that”
PROOF COPY
1808
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐17
mercy would remove this withering and poisoned thinking from
your holy mind. Christ has forgiven you, and in His sight the world
is125 holy as Himself. Who sees no evil in it sees like Him, for what
He has forgiven has not sinned, and guilt can be no more.
Salvationʹs plan is made complete, and sanity has come.
S 2 B 8 Forgiveness is the call to sanity, for who but the insane
would look on sin when he could see the face of Christ instead?
This is the choice you make; the simplest one, and yet the only one
that you can make. God calls on you to save His Son from death by
offering the love of Christ126 to him. This is your need, and God
Himself127 holds out this gift to you. As He would give, so must you
give as well. And thus is prayer restored to formlessness, beyond
all limits into timelessness, with nothing of the past to hold it back
from re‐uniting with the ceaseless song that all creation sings unto
its God. S(15)
S 2 B 9 But to achieve this end you first must learn, before you
reach where learning cannot go. Forgiveness is the key, but who
can use a key when he has lost the door for which the key was
made, and where alone it fits? Therefore we make distinctions, so
that prayer can be released from darkness into light.
Forgivenessʹs128 role must be reversed, and cleansed from evil
usages and hateful goals. Forgiveness‐to‐destroy must be unveiled
in all its treachery, and then let go forever and forever. There can be
no trace of it remaining, if the plan that God established for
returning be achieved at last, and learning be complete.
S 2 B 10 This is the world of opposites. And you must choose
between them every instant while this world retains reality for you.
Yet you must learn alternatives for choice, or you will not be able to
attain your freedom. Let it then be clear to you exactly what
125 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “becomes as”
126 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “Christ’s Love”
127 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete “Himself”
128 FIP and the Manuscript both have “Forgiveness’”, or “s apostrophe” which would be correct if
“forgiveness” were a plural possessive case, but it is a singular possessive case, so it should be
“apostrophe s” -- From "A Manual of Style" (12th ed., University of Chicago Press, 1969):
PROOF COPY
1809
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐18
forgiveness means to you, and learn what it should be to set you
free. The level of your prayer129 depends on this, for here it waits its
freedom to ascend above the world of chaos into peace.
C. Forgiveness‐to‐destroy
S 2 C 1 Forgiveness‐to‐destroy has many forms, being a weapon of
the world of form. Not all of them are obvious, and some are
carefully concealed beneath what seems like charity. Yet all the
forms that it may130 take have but one131 goal; their purpose is to
separate and make what God created equal, different. The
difference is clear in several forms where the designed comparison
cannot be missed, nor is it132 meant to be.
S 2 C 2 In this group, first, there are the forms in which a ʺbetterʺ
person deigns to stoop to save a baser133 one from what he134 is.
Forgiveness here rests solely on the base135 of gracious lordliness so
far from love that arrogance could never be dislodged. Who can
forgive and yet despise? And who can tell another he is steeped in
sin, and yet perceive him as the Son of God? Who makes a slave to
teach what freedom is? There is no union here, but only grief. This
is not136 mercy. This is death.
S 2 C 3 Another form, still very like the first if it is understood, does
not appear in quite such blatant arrogance. The one who would
forgive the S(16) other does not claim to be the better. Now he
merely137 says138 that here is one whose sinfulness he shares, since
both have been unworthy and deserve the retribution of the wrath
of God. This can appear to be a humble act,139 and can140 indeed
129 Originally plural, the typist overstruck the “s” making it singular. FIP keeps it singular.
130 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “seem to”
131 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “this single”
132 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “really”
133 FIP adds quotes around “baser”
134 Handwritten mark-up suggests really, crossed out and replaces with “truly” which FIP keeps.
135 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replaces “solely on the base” with “on an attitude”
136 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “really”
137 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete “merely”
138 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “instead”
139 FIP changes “act” to “thought”
140 FIP changes “can” to “may”
PROOF COPY
1810
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐19
become141 a rivalry in baseness142 and in guilt. It is not love for
Godʹs creation and the holiness that is His gift forever. Can His Son
condemn himself and still remember Him?
S 2 C 4 Here the goal is to separate from God the Son He loves, and
keep him from his Source. This goal is also sought by those who
seek the role of martyr at anotherʹs hand. Here must the aim be
clearly seen, for this may pass as meekness and as charity instead of
cruelty. Is it not kind to be accepting of anotherʹs spite, and not
respond except with silence and a gentle smile? Behold, how good
are you who bear with patience and with saintliness the anger and
the hurt another gives, and do not show the bitter pain you feel.
S 2 C 5 Forgiveness‐to‐destroy will often hide behind a cloak like
this. It shows the face of suffering and pain, in silent proof of guilt
and of the ravages of sin. Such is the witness that it offers one who
could be savior, not an enemy. But having made him143 enemy, he
must accept the guilt and heavy‐laid reproach that thus is put upon
him. Is this love? Or is it rather treachery to one who needs
salvation from the pain of guilt? What is it for,144 except to keep the
witnesses of guilt away from love?
S 2 C 6 Forgiveness‐to‐destroy can also take the form of bargaining
and compromise. ʺI will forgive you if you meet my needs, for in
your slavery is my release.” Say this to anyone and you are slave.
And you will seek to rid yourself of guilt in further bargains which
can give no hope, but only greater pain and misery. How fearful
has forgiveness now become, and how distorted is the end it seeks.
Have mercy on yourself who bargained145 thus. God gives and does
not ask for recompense. There is no giving but to give like Him. All
else is mockery. For who would try to strike a bargain with the Son
of God, and thank his Father for his holiness? S(17)
141 FIP changes “become” to “induce”
142 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “baseness and in” to “sinfulness and guilt”
143 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “made him” to “been made”
144 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “is it for” to “could the purpose be”
145 FIP changes this to the present tense, “bargains”
PROOF COPY
1811
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐20
S 2 C 7 What would you show your brother? Would you try to
reinforce his guilt and thus your own? Forgiveness is the means for
your escape. How pitiful it is to make of it a146 means for further
slavery and pain. Within the world of opposites there is a way to
use forgiveness for the goal of God, and find the peace He offers
you. Take nothing else, or you have sought your death, and prayed
for separation from your Self. Christ is for all because He is in all.147
It is His face forgiveness lets you see. It is His face in which you
see148 your own.
S 2 C 8 All forms forgiveness takes that do not lead away from
anger, condemnation, and comparisons of every kind are death. For
that is what their purposes have set. Be not deceived by them, but
lay them by as worthless in their tragic offerings. You do not want
to stay in slavery. You do not want to be afraid of God. You want
to see the sunlight and the glow of Heaven shining on the face of
earth, redeemed from sin and in the Love of God. From here is
prayer released, along with you. Your wings are free, and prayer
will lift you up and bring you home where God would have you be.
D. Forgiveness‐for‐Salvation
S 2 D 1 Forgiveness‐for‐salvation has one form, and only one. It
does not ask for proof of innocence, nor pay of any kind. It does not
argue, nor evaluate the errors that it wants to overlook. It does not
offer gifts in treachery, nor promise freedom while it asks for death.
Would God deceive you? He but asks for trust and willingness to
learn how to be free. He gives His Teacher to whoever asks, and
seeks to understand the Will of God. His readiness to give lies far
beyond your understanding and your simple grasp. Yet He has
willed you learn the way to Him, and in His willing there is
certainty.
146 FIP changes “a” to “the”
147 1 Corinthians 15:28 “Now when all things are made subject to Him, then the Son Himself will also
be subject to Him who put all things under Him, that God may be all in all.”
148 Manuscript does not contain “you see”, but this correction is handwritten in.
PROOF COPY
1812
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐21
S 2 D 2 You Child of God, the gifts of God are yours, not by your
plans but by His holy Will. His Voice will teach you what
forgiveness is, and how to give it as He wills it be. Do not, then,
seek to understand what is beyond you yet, but let it be a way to
draw you up to where the sight149 of Christ becomes the eyes150 you
choose. Give up all else, for there IS nothing else. When someone
S(18) calls for help in any form, He is the One to answer for you. All
that you need do is to step back and not to interfere. Forgiveness‐
for‐salvation is His task, and it is He Who will respond for you.
S 2 D 3 Do not establish what the form should be that His151
forgiveness takes. He knows the way to make of every call a help to
you, as you arise in haste to go at last unto your Fatherʹs house.152
He will direct153 your footsteps surely,154 and 155your words sincere;
149 Handwritten mark-up and FIL change “sight” to “eyes” and the verb “becomes” is changed to
“become”
150 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “eyes” to “sight”
151 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “His” to “Christ’s”
152 Luke 15:11-32 Then He said: "A certain man had two sons. And the younger of them said to his
father, "Father, give me the portion of goods that falls to me.' So he divided to them his livelihood. And
not many days after, the younger son gathered all together, journeyed to a far country, and there wasted
his possessions with prodigal living. But when he had spent all, there arose a severe famine in that land,
and he began to be in want. Then he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country, and he sent
him into his fields to feed swine. And he would gladly have filled his stomach with the pods that the
swine ate, and no one gave him anything. "But when he came to himself, he said, "How many of my
father's hired servants have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I will arise and go to
my father, and will say to him, "Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you, and I am no
longer worthy to be called your son. Make me like one of your hired servants."'
"And he arose and came to his father. But when he was still a great way off, his father saw him and had
compassion, and ran and fell on his neck and kissed him. And the son said to him, "Father, I have
sinned against heaven and in your sight, and am no longer worthy to be called your son.'
"But the father said to his servants, "Bring out the best robe and put it on him, and put a ring on his
hand and sandals on his feet. And bring the fatted calf here and kill it, and let us eat and be merry; for
this my son was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.' And they began to be merry.
"Now his older son was in the field. And as he came and drew near to the house, he heard music and
dancing. So he called one of the servants and asked what these things meant. And he said to him, "Your
brother has come, and because he has received him safe and sound, your father has killed the fatted
calf.'
"But he was angry and would not go in. Therefore his father came out and pleaded with him. So he
answered and said to his father, "Lo, these many years I have been serving you; I never transgressed
your commandment at any time; and yet you never gave me a young goat, that I might make merry with
my friends. But as soon as this son of yours came, who has devoured your livelihood with harlots, you
killed the fatted calf for him.'
"And he said to him, "Son, you are always with me, and all that I have is yours. It was right that we
should make merry and be glad, for your brother was dead and is alive again, and was lost and is
found."'
153 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “He will direct” to “Now can he make”
PROOF COPY
1813
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐22
not with your own sincerity, but with His Own. Let Him take
charge of how you would forgive, and each occasion then will be to
you another step to Heaven and to peace.
S 2 D 4 Are you not weary of imprisonment? God did not choose
this sorry path for you. What you have chosen still can be undone,
for prayer is merciful and God is just. His is a justice He can
understand, but you cannot as yet. Yet156 will He give the means to
you to learn of Him, and know at last that condemnation is not real
and makes illusions in its evil name. And yet it matters not the form
that dreams may seem to take. Illusions are untrue. Godʹs Will is
truth, and you are one with Him in Will and purpose. Here all
dreams are done.
S 2 D 5 ʺWhat should I do for this,157 Your holy Son?ʺ should be the
only thing you ever ask when help is needed and forgiveness
sought. The form the seeking takes you need not judge. But158 let it
not be you who sets the form in which forgiveness comes to save
Godʹs Son. The light of Christ in him is his release, and it is this that
answers to his call. Forgive him as the Christ decides you should,
and be His eyes through which you look on him, and speak for Him
as well. He knows the need; the question and the answer. He will
say exactly what to do in words that you can understand159 and you
can also use. Do not confuse His function with your own. He is the
Answer; you the one who hears.
S 2 D 6 And what is it He speaks to you about? About salvation
and the gift of peace. About the end of sin and guilt and death.
About the role forgiveness has in Him. Do you but listen, for He
will be heard by anyone who calls upon His Name, and S(19) places
his forgiveness in His hands. Forgiveness has been given Him to
teach, to save it from destruction and to make the means for
154 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “surely” to “sure”
155 Handwritten mark-up and FIP omit “and”
156 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “Yet” with “still”
157 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “this” to “him”
158 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “But” to “And”
159 The original Manuscript inserts, apparently in error “that you can use as well and that you can also
use.”
PROOF COPY
1814
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐23
separation, sin and death become again the holy gift of love.160
Prayer is His Own right hand, made free to save as true forgiveness
is allowed to come from His eternal vigilance and Love.
S 2 D 7 Listen and learn, and do161 not judge. It is to God you turn
to hear what you should do. His Answer will be clear as morning,
nor is His forgiveness what you think it is. Still does He know, and
that should be enough. Forgiveness has a Teacher Who will fail in
nothing. Rest a while in this; do not attempt to judge forgiveness,
nor to set it in an earthly frame. Let it arise to Christ, Who
welcomes it as gift to Him. He will not leave you comfortless,162 nor
fail to send His angels down to answer you in His Own Name. He
stands beside the door to which forgiveness is the only key. Give it
to Him to use instead of you, and you will see the door swing
silently open upon the shining face of Christ. Behold your brother
there beyond the door; the Son of God as He created him. S(20)

HEALING
A. Introduction
S 3 A 1 Prayer has both aids and witnesses which make the steep
ascent more gentle and more sure, easing the pain of fear and
offering the comfort and the promises of hope. Forgivenessʹs163
witness and an aid to prayer, a giver of assurance of success in
ultimate attainment of the goal, is healing. Its importance should
not be too strongly emphasized, for healing is a sign or symbol of
forgivenessʹs164 strength, and only an effect or shadow of a change of
mind about the goal of prayer.
B. The Cause of Sickness
S 3 B 1 Do not mistake effect for cause, nor think that sickness is
apart and separate from what its cause must be. It is a sign, a
160 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “love” with “God”
161 T I B 26b (4)
162 John 14:18 “I will not leave you orphans; I will come to you.”
163 FIP and the Manuscript both have “Forgiveness’”, or “s apostrophe” which would be correct if
“forgiveness” were a plural possessive case, but it is a singular possessive case, so it should be
“apostrophe s” -- From "A Manual of Style" (12th ed., University of Chicago Press, 1969):
164 Ibid.
PROOF COPY
1815
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐24
shadow of an evil thought that seems to have reality and to be just,
according to the usage of the world. It is external proof of inner
ʺsin,ʺ 165 and witnesses to unforgiving thoughts that injure and
would hurt the Son of God. Healing the body is impossible, and
this is shown by the brief nature of the “cure.” The body yet must
die, and healing it is but a brief delay in its return166 to dust,167 where
it was born and will go back.168
S 3 B 2 The bodyʹs source169 is unforgiveness of the Son of God. It
has not left its source, and in its pain and aging and the mark of
death upon it this is clearly shown. Fearful and frail it seems to be
to those who think their life is tied to its command and linked to its
unstable, tiny breath. Death stares at them as every moment goes
irrevocably past their grasping hands, which cannot hold them back.
And they feel fear as bodies change and sicken. For they sense the
heavy scent of death upon their hearts.
S 3 B 3 The body can be healed as an effect of true forgiveness.
Only that can give remembrance170 of immortality, which is the gift
of holiness and love. Forgiveness must be given by a mind which
understands that it must overlook all shadows on the holy face of
Christ, among which sickness should be seen as one. Nothing but
that; the sign of judgment made by brother upon brother, and the
Son of God upon himself. For he has damned his body as his
prison, S(21) and forgot that it is he who gave this role to it.
S 3 B 4 What he has done now must Godʹs Son undo. But not alone.
For he has thrown away the prisonʹs key; his holy sinlessness and
the remembrance of his Fatherʹs Love. Yet Help is given to him in
the Voice his Father placed in him. The power to heal is now his
Fatherʹs gift, for through His Voice He still can reach His Son,
165 FIP chances “sin” to “sins”
166 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change this line to “and so its healing but delays its turning back”
167 Genesis 2:7 “And the LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living being.”
168 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “go back” to “return”
169 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “source” to “cause”
170 Manuscript spells this “rememberance”
PROOF COPY
1816
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐25
reminding him the body may become his chosen home, but it will
never be his home in truth.
C. False versus True Healing171
S 3 C 1 Distinctions therefore must be made between true healing
and its faulty counterpart. The world of opposites is healingʹs place,
for what in Heaven could there be to heal? As prayer within the
world can ask amiss and seeming charity forgive to kill, so healing
can be false as well as true; a witness to the power of the world or to
the everlasting Love of God.
S 3 C 2 False healing merely makes a poor exchange172 of one
illusion for a ʺnicerʺ one; a dream of sickness for a dream of health.
This can occur at lower forms of prayer, combining with forgiveness
kindly meant but not completely understood as yet. Only false
healing can give way to fear, so sickness will be apt173 to strike
again. False healing can indeed remove a form of pain and sickness.
But the cause remains, and will not lack effects. The cause is still the
wish to die and overcome the Christ. And with this wish is death a
certainty, for prayer IS answered. Yet there is a kind of seeming
death that has a different source. It does not come because of
hurtful thoughts and raging anger at the universe. It merely
signifies the end has come for usefulness of body functioning. And
so it is discarded as a choice, as one lays174 by a garment now
outworn.
S 3 C 3 This is what death should be; a quiet choice, made joyfully
and with a sense of peace, because the body has been kindly used to
help the Son of God along the way he goes to God. We thank the
body, then, for all the service it has given us. But we are thankful,
too, the need is done to walk the world of limits, and to reach the
Christ in hidden forms and clearly seen at most in lovely flashes.
171 FIP moves this section heading one paragraph forward.
172 Manuscript initially has “substitution” which is overstruck, “poor exchange” being typed above. The
latter is better IP.
173 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “apt” to “free”
174 Manuscript has “lies” and handwritten mark-up and FIP correct this to “lays”
PROOF COPY
1817
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐26
Now we can behold Him without blinders,175 in the light that we
S(22) have learned176 to look upon again.
S 3 C 4 We call it death, but it is liberty. It does not come in forms
that seem to be thrust down in pain upon unwilling flesh, but as a
gentle welcome to release. If there has been true healing, this can be
the form in which death comes when it is time to rest a while from
labor gladly done and gladly ended. Now we go in peace to freer
air and gentler climate, where it is not hard to see the gifts we gave
were saved for us. For Christ is clearer now; His vision more
sustained in us; His Voice, the Word of God,177 more certainly our
own.
S 3 C 5 This gentle passage to a higher prayer, a kind forgiveness of
the ways of earth, can only be received with thankfulness. Yet first
true healing must have come to bless the mind with loving pardon
for the sins it dreamed about and laid upon the world. Now are its
dreams dispelled in quiet rest. Now its forgiveness comes to heal
the world and it is ready to depart in peace,178 the journey over and
the lessons learned.
S 3 C 6 This is not death according to the world, for death is cruel in
its frightened eyes and takes the form of punishment for sin. How
could it be a blessing, then, and how could it be welcome when it
must be feared? What healing has occurred in such a view of what
is merely opening the gate to higher prayer and kindly justice done?
Death is reward and not a punishment. But such a viewpoint must
be fostered by the healing that the world cannot conceive. There is
no partial healing. What but shifts illusions has done nothing.
What is false cannot be partly true. If you are healed your healing is
complete. Forgiveness is the only gift you give and would receive.
175 1 Corinthians 13:12 For now we see in a glass darkly, but then face to face. Now I know in part,
but then I shall know just as I also am known.
176 Original is “earned”
177 John. 1:1-5 “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made through him; and without him was not
anything made that hath been made. In him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the light
shineth in the darkness; and the darkness apprehended it not.
178 Luke. 2:29 “Lord, now You are letting Your servant depart in peace, According to Your word;”
PROOF COPY
1818
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐27
S 3 C 7 False healing rests upon the bodyʹs cure, leaving the cause
of illness still unchanged, ready to strike again until it brings a cruel
death in seeming victory. It can be held at bay a little while, and
there can be brief respite as it waits to take its vengeance on the Son
of God. Yet it cannot be overcome until all faith in it has been laid
by, and placed upon Godʹs S(23) substitute for evil dreams; a world
in which there is no veil of sin to keep it dark and comfortless. At
last the gate of Heaven opens and Godʹs Son is free to enter in the
home that stands ready to welcome him, and was prepared before
time was and still but179 waits for him.
D. Separation versus Union
S 3 D 1 False healing heals the body in a part, but never as a whole.
Its separate goals become quite clear in this, for it has not removed
the curse of sin that lies on it. Therefore it still deceives. Nor is it
made by one who understands the other is exactly like himself, for it
is this that makes true healing possible. When false, there is some
power that another has, not equally bestowed on both as one. Here
is the separation shown. And here the meaning of true healing has
been lost, and idols have arisen to obscure the unity that is the Son
of God. S(24)
S 3 D 2 Healing‐to‐separate may seem to be a strange idea. Yet180 it
can be said of any form of healing that is based on inequality of any
kind. These forms may heal the body, and indeed are generally
limited to this. Someone knows better, has been better trained, or is
perhaps more talented and wise. Therefore, he can give healing to
the one who stands beneath him in his patronage. The healing of
the body can be done by this because, in dreams, equality cannot be
permanent. The shifts and change are what the dream is made of.
To be healed appears to be to find a wiser one who, by his arts and
learning, will succeed.
179 Typewritten alternative to “but” is “must”
180 FIP adds “And” before “Yet”
PROOF COPY
1819
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐28
S 3 D 3 Someone knows better; this the magic phrase by which the
body seems to be the aim of healing as the world conceives of it.
And to this wiser one another goes to profit by his learning and his
skill; to find in him the remedy for pain. How can that be? True
healing cannot come from inequality assumed and then accepted as
the truth, and used to help restore the wounded and to calm the
mind that suffers from the agony of doubt.
S 3 D 4 Is there a role for healing, then, that one can use to offer
help for someone else? In arrogance the answer must be “no.”
Yet181 in humility there is indeed a place for helpers. It is like the
role that helps in prayer, and lets forgiveness be what it is meant to
be. You do not make yourself the bearer of the special gift that
brings the healing. You but recognize your oneness with the one
who calls for help. For in this oneness is his separate sense
dispelled, and it was this that made him sick. There is no point in
giving remedy apart from where the source of sickness is, for never
thus can it be truly healed.
S 3 D 5 Healers there are, for they are Sons of God who recognize
their Source, and understand that all their Source creates is one with
them. This is the remedy that brings relief which cannot fail. It will
remain to bless for all eternity. It heals no part, but wholly and
forever. Now the cause of every malady has been revealed exactly
as it is. And in that place is written now the holy Word of S(25)
God. Sickness and separation must be healed by love and union.
Nothing else can heal as God established healing. Without Him
there is no healing, for there is no love.
S 3 D 6 Godʹs Voice alone can tell you how to heal. Listen, and you
will never fail to bring His kindly remedy to those He sends to you,
to let Him heal them, and to bless all those who serve with Him in
healingʹs name. The bodyʹs healing will occur because its cause has
gone. And now without a cause, it cannot come again in different
form. Nor will death any more be feared because it has been
181 FIP changes “Yet” to “But”
PROOF COPY
1820
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐29
understood. There is no fear in one who has been truly healed, for
love has entered now where idols used to stand, and fear has given
way at last to God.182
E. The Holiness of Healing
S 3 E 1 How holy are the healed! For in their sight their brothers
share their healing and their love. Bringers of peace ‐ the Holy
Spiritʹs voice,183 through whom He speaks for God, Whose Voice He
is ‐ such are Godʹs healers. They but speak for Him and never for
themselves. They have no gifts but those they have from God. And
these they share because they know that this is what He wills. They
are not special. They are holy. They have chosen holiness, and
given up all separate dreams of special attributes through which
they can bestow unequal gifts on those less fortunate. Their healing
has restored their wholeness so they can forgive, and join the song
of prayer in which the healed sing of their union and their thanks to
God.
S 3 E 2 As witness to forgiveness, aid to prayer, and the effect of
mercy truly taught, healing is blessing. And the world responds in
quickened chorus through the voice of prayer. Forgiveness shines
its merciful reprieve upon each blade of grass and feathered wing
and all the living things upon the earth. Fear has no haven here, for
love has come in all its holy oneness. Time remains only to let the
last embrace of prayer rest on the earth an instant, as the world is
shined away. This instant is the goal of all true healers, whom the
Christ has taught to see His likeness and to teach like Him.184
S 3 E 3 Think what it means to help the Christ to heal! Can anything
be holier S(26) than this? God thanks His healers, for He knows the
Cause of healing is Himself, His Love, His Son, restored as His
182 1 John 4:18 “There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts out fear, because fear involves torment.
But he who fears has not been made perfect in love.”
183 Manuscript has this in lower case.
184 Genesis 1:26 “And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the heavens, and over the cattle, and over all the
earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. And God created man in his own
image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.”
PROOF COPY
1821
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐30
completion and returned to share with Him creationʹs holy joy. Do
not ask partial healing, nor accept an idol for remembrance185 of
Him Whose Love has never changed and never will. You are as
dear to Him as is the whole of His creation, for it is186 in you as His
eternal gift. What need have you for shifting dreams within a sorry
world? Do not forget the gratitude of God. Do not forget the holy
grace of prayer. Do not forget forgiveness of Godʹs Son.
S 3 E 4 You first forgive, then pray, and you are healed. Your
prayer has risen up and called to God, Who hears and answers. You
have understood that you forgive yourself and pray for you187 and188
in this understanding you are healed. In prayer you have united
with your Source, and understood that you have never left. This
level cannot be attained until there is no hatred in your heart, and
no desire to attack the Son of God. Never forget this; it is you who
are Godʹs Son, and as you choose to be to him so are you to yourself,
and God to you.189
S 3 E 5 Nor will your judgment fail to reach to God, for you will
give the role to Him you see in His creation. Thus have you become
“creator”190 in His place, and He becomes191 no longer Cause but
only an effect. Now healing is impossible, for on Him lies the
blame192 for your deception and your guilt. He Who is Love is
now193 the source of fear, and194 only fear can now be justified.
Vengeance is His.195 His great destroyer, death. And sickness,
suffering and grievous loss become the lot of everyone on earth,
185 Manuscript has “rememberance”
186 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “is” with “lies”
187 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “pray for you” with “pray but for yourself.”
188 FIP starts a new sentence here.
189 Matthew 25:40 “And the King will answer and say to them, ‘Assuredly, I say to you, inasmuch as
you did it to one of the least of these My brethren, you did it to Me.'”
190 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “Thus have you become” with “Do not choose amiss or you
will think that it is you who are”
191 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “becomes” with “is then”
192 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “on Him lies the blame” with “He is blamed”
193 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “is now” with “becomes”
194 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “and” with “for”
195 Romans 12:19 “Beloved, do not avenge yourselves, but rather give place to wrath; for it is written,
"Vengeance is Mine, I will repay," says the Lord.”
PROOF COPY
1822
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐31
which He abandoned to the devilʹs care, swearing He will deliver it
no more.
S 3 E 6 Come unto Me, My children, once again, without such
twisted thoughts upon your heart.196 You still are holy with the
Holiness which fathered you in perfect sinlessness, and still
surrounds you in197 the arms of peace. Dream now of healing. Then
arise and lay all dreaming down forever. You are he your S(27)
Father loves, who never left his home, nor wandered in a savage
world with feet that bleed, and with a heavy heart made hard
against the Love that is the truth in you. Give all your dreams to
Christ and let Him be your Guide to healing, leading you in prayer
beyond the sorry reaches of the world.
S 3 E 7 He comes for Me and speaks My Word to you. I would
recall My weary Son to Me from dreams of malice to the sweet
embrace of everlasting Love and perfect peace. My arms198 are open
to the Son I love, who does not understand that he is healed, and
that his prayer has199 never ceased to sing his joyful thanks in unison
with all creation, in the holiness of God.200 Be still an instant.201
Underneath the sounds of harsh and bitter striving and defeat there
is a Voice that speaks to you of Me. Hear this an instant and you
will be healed. Hear this an instant and you have been saved.
S 3 E 8 Help Me to wake My children from the dream of retribution
and a little life beset with fear, that ends so soon it might as well
have never been. Let Me instead remind you of eternity, in which
your joy grows greater as your love extends along with Mine
beyond infinity, where time and distance have no meaning. While
you wait in sorrow Heavenʹs melody is incomplete, because your
196 Manuscript has “heart” singular, FIP changes this to plural “hearts”
197 FIP replaces “in” with “with”
198 FIP capitalizes “Arms”
199 FIP changes this to “prayers have”
200 FIP changes “God” to “Love”
201 Psalm 46:10 “Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted
in the earth!”
PROOF COPY
1823
Volume VI Song of Prayer
VI‐32
song is part of the eternal harmony of love. Without you is creation
incomplete.202 Return to Me Who never left His203 Son.
S 3 E 9 Listen, My child, Your Father calls to you. Do not refuse to
hear the call of204 Love. Do not deny to Christ what is His Own.
Heaven is here and Heaven is your home. Creation leans across the
bars of time to lift the heavy burden from the world. Lift up your
hearts to greet its advent. See the shadows fade away in gentleness;
the thorns fall softly from the bleeding brow of him who is the holy
Son of God.205 How lovely are you, Child of Holiness! How like to
Me! How lovingly I hold you in My heart and in My arms. How
dear is every gift that you have given Me,206 who healed My Son and
took him from the cross.
S 3 E 10 Arise and let My thanks be given you. And with My
gratitude will come the gift first of forgiveness, then eternal peace.
So now return your holy S(28) voice to Me. The song of prayer is
silent without you. The universe is waiting your release because it
is its own. Be kind to it and to yourself, and then be kind to Me. I
ask but this; that you be comforted and live no more in terror and in
pain. Do not abandon Love. Remember this; whatever you may
think about yourself, whatever you may think about the world, your
Father needs you and will call207 to you until you come to Him in
peace at last.
202 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “incomplete” with “unfulfilled”
203 FIP changes “His” to “My”
204 FIP has “for” instead of “of”
205 Matthew 27:29 “When they had twisted a crown of thorns, they put it on His head, and a reed in His
right hand. And they bowed the knee before Him and mocked Him, saying, ‘Hail, King of the Jews!’”
206 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “that you have given Me” to “to Me that you have made,”
207 Matthew 22:14 “For many are called, but few chosen.”
PROOF COPY